---
title: HWS | Frontend Documentation
date: 2026-02-08 02:55:00 -500
categories: [Hemisferios' Web System]
tags: [react,ui,frontend,express,mongodb,node,tailwindcss,shadcn]
published: true
---

## Introduction - About the Project
The Hemisferios' Web System is a software project I had the opportunity to work on for my final internship program at the university. Here, I worked on a unified system that comprehends a website and an appointment system (for administrators only) for Hemisferios, a clinical center that offers language and communication therapy for children.

In this page, you'll find the processes, methods and functions used to build the **frontend** of the project. I'll explain the following:

- Installed dependencies.
- File organization.
- Explanation of modules and functions.
- Endpoint consumption.
- UI/UX decisions.

The following is the tech stack I used: 
* Next.js.
* React.
* Tailwind CSS.
* Shadcn-UI.
* Axios.

## Project's Elements
This project is a centralized solution that offers the capability of both creating and managing appointments. Although this is the main functionality and objective of the project, there are other functionalities it offers, which are described as it follows:

* **Appointments:** These are the main elements of the project. They serve as pieces of information about new appointments generated by users in the website. They include important data such as the patient's full name, contact number, date, and hour.
* **Patients:** Another important element of the project. Patients can be registered and managed in the system to have a broader control of the center's attendees and rapidly access important essential information about them.
* **Therapists:** The therapy personnel of the center can also be registered in the system. With this functionality, the administrator will be able to save important information about the therapist and track the current working body of the center.
* **Center's Availability:** It is the set of days and hours from which users can select when they are booking an appointment in the website, for both the current week and the next one.
* **Center's Statistics:** They have the objective of presenting the center's most useful information in a visual, intuitive way and provide an overview of the processes that are being carried out at the moment, such as the total number of appointments, percentages by month, and earning estimations.
* **Contact Messages:** These are the main communication channel between the website's users and the system's administrators. When users create and send a contact message from the website, administrators can easily see them in the system and reach them via email or phone number to address the comment.

The following is a comprehensive explanation of the libraries, functions and modules that were created to handle the operations that each one of the previously described components require.


## Environment Setup
Let's first create a folder named `frontend` in the root of our project's directory. We then access this new folder and run the following command in a terminal to create a new Next.js application.

```bash
npx create-next-app@latest app-name
```

In the terminal, we will be asked if we want to use the recommended Next.js defaults, which includes the following technologies:

- **TypeScript**: A typed programming language that builds on JavaScript.
- **ESLint**: A program that finds JavaScript code issues to ease their spot and fix.
- **Tailwind CSS**: A CSS framework for writing styles in the form of utility classes.
- **App Router**: A file-system based router from Next.js to allow navigation between pages.
- **Turbopack**: An incremental bundler for React Components and Typescript codebases.

I accepted to use these technologies in my project, but we can also customize our own settings.

To install **Shadcn-UI**, we run the following command:

```npx shadcn@latest init```

Then, we can start adding components to our project as it follows:

```npx shadcn@latest add <componentName>```

Refer to the [official documentation](https://ui.shadcn.com/docs/components) to see the components that can be installed.

## Folder Structure
Since this project contains two separated views, one for the **website**, accessible for all users, and one for the **appointment system**, accesible for administrators only, I was looking for a folder structure that allowed me to easily find and maintain the files that correspond to each view.

In the main ```frontend``` directory, there is a subfolder named ```app```, which is, conventionally, the place where we should create the folders for each page of our project, and their corresponding ```.tsx``` file. In my case, it looks as it follows:

```
- frontend
    - app
        - page.tsx (Homepage of the website)
        - about-us
            - page.tsx
        - book-appointment
            - page.tsx
        - contact
            - page.tsx
        - finished-appointment
            - page.tsx
        - services-and-prices
            - page.tsx
        - system
            - Folders for each page of the Appointment System.
```

The rest of the folders of the projects are described as it follows:

- ```public```: This folder in our main directory is the place where we can **save images, illustrations, and SVG files** that we intend to use in a page.
- `components`: This folder saves TypeScript in JSX (`.tsx`) **files that contain reusable code for UI elements, components and sections**, such as buttons, cards, inputs, badges, and containers.
- `lib`: I destined this folder to be a place where I could store **functions that have a direct interaction with the database**. For instance, the `axios` API an URL, reusable CRUD controllers, or any other neccesary methods that directly interact with the database.
- `utils`: In this folder, we can find all the reusable functions or set of functions that **interact with the UI and tranform different types of data to present it in the frontend**, such as formatting an appointment's date and hour, formatting the center's avilability, building the appointment calendar's structure, etc.

Therefore, we have a final structure that looks like this:

```
- frontend
    - app
    - components
    - lib
    - public
    - utils
```

In the following sections, I provide a more detailed explanation on the content of each one of these folders and how they connect with each other to complete the various operations and functionalities of the project.

# UI Components (`components`)

# Database Interactions (`lib`)

# Modules and Functions (`utils`)
In this section, I will explain the purpose and functioning of the modules that I created to achieve a specific task in specific components or UI sections. These functions and libraries can be found in the folder `utils` of the project.

## Website's Modules

### PDF Generation

### Classes

### Input Change Handling

### Zustand's Appointment Store

### Visibility Detector

## Appointment System's Modules

### Appointment Formatting

* **Main file:** `utils/appointments/appointment-formatter.ts`.
* **Functions described:** `dateFormatter`, `hourFormatter`. 

The hour and date of an appointment has a different format for when it is stored in the database, from when it is presented in the frontend.

* In the **database**, an appointment's date is stored in a *DD/MM/YYYY* format, known as the *little-endian* format. The hour is stored in a *24-hour* format.
* On the other hand, in the **frontend** of both the website and the system, an appointment's date is presented in a more readable way: *12 de febrero, 2026* (February 21th, 2026 in English, which is a normally written date). The hour here is presented in a *12-hour* format.

In order to handle these different presentations of an appointment's date and hour, the functions `dateFomatter` and `hourFormatter` were built.
1. The first one transforms a given date with a little-endian format into a normally written one.
2. The second one transforms a given hour with the 24-hour format into one with the 12-hour one.

Each one access the properties of an object that pairs database-frontend values, as it follows:

**In the `dateFormatter` function:**

```javascript
    // The object's keys is how the database stores months, and the values is how the frontend presents them.

    const months: Record<MonthNumbers, MonthNames> = {
        "01": "enero",
        "02": "febrero",
        "03": "marzo",
        "04": "abril",
        "05": "mayo",
        "06": "junio",
        "07": "julio",
        "08": "agosto",
        "09": "septiembre",
        "10": "octubre",
        "11": "noviembre",
        "12": "diciembre"
    };
```

**In the `hourFormatter` function:**

```javascript
    // The object's keys is how the database stores hours, and the values is how the frontend presents them.

    const hours: Record<MilitarFormat, TwelveFormat> = {
        "08:00": "08:00 a.m.",
        "09:00": "09:00 a.m.",
        "10:00": "10:00 a.m.",
        "11:00": "11:00 a.m.",
        "12:00": "12:00 p.m.",
        "13:00": "01:00 p.m.",
        "14:00": "02:00 p.m.",
        "15:00": "03:00 p.m.",
        "16:00": "04:00 p.m.",
        "17:00": "05:00 p.m.",
        "18:00": "06:00 p.m.",
        "19:00": "07:00 p.m.",
        "20:00": "08:00 p.m."
    };
```

These objects are accessed with brackets that contain the given date or hour to return a transformed value that can be shown in the frontend.

### Availability Formatting
* **Main file:** `utils/appointments/appointment-formatter.ts`.
* **Functions described:** `dateFormatter`, `hourFormatter`. 


